Good day i'm Norman Wildberger in our last few
videos we've been talking about the consequences
of looking more carefully at the difficulties
involved with bigger numbers we're talking
about really big numbers numbers which are so big
that they probably can't be used for any practical
purposes but nevertheless we can write down
expressions and stare at them and sort of ponder
the consequences of having such big things around
today we're going to go further in that direction
and we're going to create a setup that allows us
to go far beyond where we've gone previously and
really head off into an interesting kind of new
territory which is completely devoid of sort of
arithmetic 'el applications but makes interesting
connections with other aspects of mathematics and
in our next video we'll see that it even makes
contact with some modern set theory dubious though
that subject may be so we have this hierarchy
of arithmetic operations starting with ordinary
addition then going to multiplication which we
can write as star 1 exponentiation which will
ride the star 2 and then this triangle sort of
exponentiation called star 3 the square operation
called star 4 and so on now there's an inductive
or recursive way to get from one of these hyper
operations to the next and I want to review that
you know somewhat more general context so it turns
out that given any binary arithmetic operation
we can create in some sense a successor operation
from that one this is a very interesting kind of
general operation so let's suppose that we have a
binary arithmetic operation of a rather arbitrary
kind and let's call it say this circle cross all
right so circle cross is some binary arithmetic
operation and you can think about it as perhaps
the one of these or perhaps as being something
else and now we wanted to define something called
its successor operation which would be circle
cross Prime okay so we're assuming we have
circle cross which is an operation like addition
or multiplication or exponentiation and we're
going to find circle cross Prime a new operation
and here's how we're gonna do it and this should
be familiar if you remember how we went from one
of these to the next one so we'll define em circle
cross Prime one to be just M so this new successor
operation has the property that M times one in
that operation is M now here is the inductive step
that allows us to define M circle cross prime n
plus 1 in terms of M circle cross prime n okay so
we're kind of assuming that we have this under our
belts and we're now defining this one where we're
jacking up the second component by one and the
definition is that this thing is M circle cross M
circle cross prime n so we're using the original
operation right there that's the only place where
we're using it and then given this one here we're
defining M circle cross Prime at n plus 1 in terms
of that previous operation and the circle cross
prime evaluated at n now I remind you that this
is how we can get from addition to multiplication
if you replace the circle cross with addition and
then the circle cross prime becomes multiplication
so the successor of addition is multiplication and
the successor of multiplication is exponentiation
the successor of exponentiation is this triangle
power and the successor of the triangle power is
the square power and more generally in this sort
of sequence that's sort of how we defined the
higher and higher hyper operations that the
successor of star K is star K + 1 so that's how
we can continue this sequence of hyper operations
getting more and more complicated ones so to get
from here to the next one which would be star 5
we would just apply this inductive recursive kind
of a definition as an example I remind you that M
triangle n is this combination here m to the M all
the way up to the M where there are altogether
n of these emblems and this operation figured
prominently in our discussion of complexity
when we were talking about the minimal way
of representing a given natural number with some
fixed range of arithmetic operations what about M
Square and going up one from here well let me
remind you we've talked about this before but
it's useful just to be reminded that M Square
1 is M that's the definition an M Square 2 is
then M triangle M Square 1 M Square 1 is M so
we're talking about M triangle M which is this
tower of M's with now M of them so that's what
M square 2 is it's a tower of M s where there
are M in that tower and then M square 3 will
be M triangle of this M square 2 that we just
figured out so it's M triangle this and that
means it's a row or Tower of M's where there
are altogether this number of M's in the tower so
we can write that as here's this tower of M and
the number in this tower is this number here so
we're getting sort of more and more brackets as
we up this second entry and the square operation
so as an exercise please convince yourself that M
square 4 has this expression it involves 4 powers
of em where this last hour only has a single M but
nevertheless they're sort of four towers there
and each one controls the size of the previous
tower in this tower there's M M's in this tower
there's that many M s and in this tower there's
that many M's so it should be now sort of clear
that to get M square v you would just extend this
diagram by adding yet another bracket and another
Tower of M's there so that would then be five such
towers of ends and so on and so generalizing if
we're interested in M square n then we'll have a
picture like this where there are altogether n
towers of atoms 1 2 all the way up to the nth
tower there so we have a pretty good picture of
the square operation and what about the next one
the star 5 operation well M star 5 of 1 is M as
it has to be and then the definition M star 5 of
n plus 1 will be M square M star 5 of n so let's
have a look at what happens here with this star 5
operation so M star 5 2 is by definition M square
M star 5 1 well this by definition is M so we're
talking about M square m so that's just like this
but now where the number of towers in this row of
towers is in fact M itself this M square M as
opposed to M square and then alright so this
thing here is M star 5/2 and then the next one M
star 5/3 will be M square of the what we've just
got M star 5/2 so M square something is a pattern
like this where we have towers of em and they're
all together n of them so if we have this number
of them it means we have to the number of towers
hearing being this thing that we've just obtained
in the previous slide so we have this row and the
number in this row the number of towers and this
are always given by this quantity here which is a
similar expression where there's M towers in this
one so here's an exercise see if you agree with my
assessment of what M star six of an is so here is
something like we've just been looking at towers
of M and then there's a certain number of braces
and altogether now the number of braces here is
controlled by a similar tower of things and that's
controlled by another tower etc so altogether we
have all of these similar kinds of towers and then
the final one has M braces in it and how many are
there all together in these sort of towers if we
call it that as the first one that's the second
one and that M is the nth one so if there's n
of them then we're getting M star six of n so
it convinced yourself that that's what it looks
like and then it should be somewhat clear how
the pattern proceeds we're going from brackets
in this direction to braces in this direction
two brackets in this direction two braces in
this direction two brackets in this direction
the braces in that direction and so on as we up
these subscripts for the operations themselves so
we now have a hierarchy of actual operations of
arithmetic operations and we have a pretty good
sense of how to at least in principle write down
what any one of these operations does on natural
numbers this sequence of operations allows us to
overwhelm any given sequence of bigger numbers
so there's a little bit of one-upmanship in this
game where people try to create bigger and bigger
numbers and so sort of a fun game even though
it's pretty frivolous but so suppose somebody
comes along with a sequence of bigger and bigger
numbers let's call them Sigma 1 Sigma 2 Sigma 3
and these numbers grow very very dramatically
perhaps you know the claim is more faster than
any previous sequence of numbers so you can go
beyond that particular sequence by creating this
particular sequence 10 star Sigma 1 Sigma 1 10
star Sigma 2 Sigma 2 10 star Sigma 3 Sigma 3 and
so on so you can take whatever sequence of numbers
they have created and create a new sequence of
numbers where you're employing their numbers as
not just exponents but also as the subscripts of
our arithmetic operations so this will guarantee
that the sequence here is phenomenally bigger than
whatever given sequence you've got so there's no
end to the possibilities for creating bigger and
bigger sequences but more importantly this trick
suggests sacktual II a new kind of operation it
suggests some kind of limiting operation which
we might call star infinity so we're going to
go beyond this already very daunting sequence
of operations to get at a new one call star
infinity and we'll also have a more sort of finite
looking name for it we'll also end up calling it
star n or we use the letter little n there but
at first let me stick with this one here because
it's more suggestive of what we're going to do so
let's introduce the idea of a diagonal limit and
let's start by considering powers or multiples
of some natural number M so if we look at our
first multiplication operators just ordinary
multiplication M times 1 M times 2m times 3m
times 4 this will be relatively modest row with
M 2 M 3 M 4 M 5 m and so on like that first row
and then along the second row we have all the star
2 powers of M now start to is the exponentiation
operator so this is M to the 1 M Squared M cubed
M to the fourth so the second row the numbers are
increasing faster than they were in the first row
in the third row we have this star 3 operator the
triangle operator with an M triangle one that was
just M M triangle - that's m to the M M triangle
3 that's m to the M to the M and triangle 4 etc
and then we can carry on so M star 4 that's the
square operator we have M Square 1 M square 2 m
square 3 M square floor and we had pictures of
those earlier in this video and of course we
can carry on with more rows involving higher
exponents in our operators all right let's look
at this two-dimensional grid of sort of powers of
M and we're interested now in just looking down
the diagonal ok so a two-dimensional grid like
this has a sort of canonical diagonals rather
important object inside this whole thing and
if we go down this diagonal what we see is that
the second numbers are increasing by 1 but also
the subscripts here are increasing by 1 in other
words we're getting bigger and bigger operators
each operator is the successor of the previous
one so the operators and this second exponent are
marching together as we go down this diagonal so
looking down the diagonal gives this new sequence
M star 1 1 M star 2 2 m star 3 3 M star 4 4 and
it's this that motivates this new kind of operator
so we're going to define a new operator called
star infinity which is really encoding this thing
here there's some sequence involving all of these
operators star 1 star 2 star 3 and so on so here's
the definition that M star infinity K is M star
k k it's a new definition a new operator between
natural numbers and the idea is to take this
second exponent and use it as both an exponent
but also as picking out the particular operation
that we're going to use so this K determines the
operator as well as the exponent and you might
wonder why I'm using K here not our usual N and
the reason is because I want to shortly change
notation and replace the star infinity with
something more modest looking namely star n but in
this picture the N is actually a fixed letter the
little letter N and we don't then want to confuse
that fixed letter end with the variable that were
using in equations like this so this is some kind
of limiting operator created from this sequence
of operators that we have we have the sequence
of operators and then we sort of look down the
diagonal to create this new operator which is
like star infinity all right so we may regard
this new operation star infinity as some kind
of limit of the given operation star 1 star 2
star 3 and we'll write something like this where
we'll write this operation this operation this
operation some three dots and an arrow and then
star infinity so this is just notation that we'll
use to represent the fact that this operation is
created from this sequence of operations by this
diagonal kind of definition and in fact we'll
actually use that terminology sometimes it's
the ex infinity is the diagonal limit of star
1 star 2 star 3 and so on alright so we are
using words like sequence and limit here but you
shouldn't pay too much attention to them right
the critical thing is actually just the definition
of star infinity we don't really need these words
to describe it these words are suggestive to give
us an idea of what's going on but in fact they're
not really essential the essential thing is just
a formula that tells us how to multiply two things
using this particular operation that's completely
finite involving just these previous ones now I
want to as I said introduce an alternate notation
and you'll see why there our next video so let's
call star infinity rather star n okay so let's
have some examples so 10 star and 1 okay so by
definition that's 10 star 1 1 this one here ends
up being the subscript of the star as well as
the exponent and so that's 10 times 1 which is
10 10 star n - well that's 10 star 2 - to make
that exponent appear here and here star 2 is the
exponentiation operation so it's 10 squared which
is a hundred ten star n 3 would be 10 star 3 3 so
that's 10 triangle 3 and that's 10 to the 10 to
the 10 so we're growing reasonably rapidly here
not such a big jump from here to here but quite
a big jump from there to there what happens if
we keep going well 10 star + 4 is 10 star for
4 and the star 4 is our square operations that's
10 square 4 and that's 10 square 4 there so it's
a tower of tens where the number in this tower is
that where the number in this tower is that with a
number in this tower is 10 and 10 star + 5 is 10
star 5 5 and that's the kind of thing that we've
been talking about earlier in this video where we
have some kind of tower like this of brackets of
towers of 10 going this way 10 to the 10 wait
10 to 10 10 where the number in this tower is
given by this number this tower given by this the
number this tires given by this and the number of
towers here is 10 so there's sort of 1 2 3 4
or 5 levels so as an exercise you might like
to write down expression for 10 star and 6 so what
we're seeing here is that this star end operation
has a quite different character in some ways from
the ordinary star 1 star 2 star 3 operations that
as we're jacking up the second exponent the the
numbers are growing much faster than they were for
any one of the star 1 star 2 star 3 and so on so
this new operation really transcends in a big way
the individual operation star 1 star 2 star 3 and
so on that we've been considering and even those
we've seen are ridiculously big operation so now
we have something which is at a much higher level
than what we had previously all right so this
is actually somewhat interesting in that purely
as a theoretical exercise we're now in a position
actually to see looming ahead of us something even
bigger ok this is really just the beginnings of
what we might call the successor limit hierarchy
which is an interesting pattern that's not just
connected with bigger and bigger numbers in this
somewhat frivolous game but actually connects
with other things as well and in fact touches
base with the theory of ordinal numbers in modern
set theory which from my point of view is highly
problematic but we'll see nevertheless that there
are aspects of that that can be thought about and
realized in a rather concrete way perhaps
independent of the usual set theoretical
infinite foundations upon which it usually rests
so that's gonna be interesting that we're getting
at some kind of ordinal arithmetic here in a
non set theoretical fashion so that's what we'll
do in our next video I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening